---
title: "AJAX from the Beginning"
date: 2020/05/17 12:06:00 Z
categories:
- Tutorials
layout: post
author: Benji
hero: ajax-bottle.jpg
---

I'm going to let you in on a secret superpower I have. With a small string of text, I can download any website in the world. OK, so maybe it's not very super. It's called an HTTP request and your browser does this all the time. But what if you could do it *yourself*? We call that AJAX.

> **Disclaimer!** *This article assumes a basic knowledge of HTTP's structure. If you know the meaning of GET and POST, read on! Otherwise, I highly recommend going straight to the [Wikipedia source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypertext_Transfer_Protocol#Request_methods).*

AJAX is **A**synchronous **J**avaScript **a**nd **X**ML. It was developed to call and return XML strings from a server, but it's been widely adopted as a solution for getting things from other pages, or doing the things that your browser does independently of the standards to which it adheres.

For example, let's say we want to send a form. With HTML's `<form>` element, I can tell the browser to send information via POST or GET request types through a very predictable and typical process:
1. Gather the form fields.
2. Do the HTTP request.
3. Reload the page.

But what if I don't want to reload? Reloading on form submission is a terrible UX. Modern web design will *never* reload on form submission. Instead, we use AJAX.

*[This next bit is going to use jQuery, and I'll explain why in a moment. Credit: [scotch.io](https://scotch.io/tutorials/submitting-ajax-forms-with-jquery)]*

{% highlight js linenos %}
$('#form').submit(function(event){
  // stop the form from submitting and refreshing by preventing the default browser behavior
  event.preventDefault();
  
  // gather and validate data fields from the form, typically storing the result as JSON
  var formData = formJSON;

  // AJAX, the jQuery way
  $.ajax({
      type        : 'POST', // define the type of HTTP verb we want to use (POST for our form)
      url         : 'process.php', // the url where we want to POST
      data        : formData, // our data object
      dataType    : 'json', // what type of data do we expect back from the server
      encode      : true
  })
    // using something called a Promise, we can wait for the servers to respond, then use the results when they come
    .done(function(data) {

        // log data to the console so we can see the result and confirm no errors
        console.log(data); 
    });
});
{% endhighlight %}


## Cool, so now what about that JQ?

Yeah, so jQuery's AJAX feels pretty simple. It's just the HTTP `type`, the `url` we're grabbing from, and a body of any data. Maybe you can encode it, or use HTTP headers if you're getting really fancy. 

The original method is a bit more cumbersome. The [universally supported](https://caniuse.com/#feat=mdn-api_xmlhttprequest) base method for AJAX is called [`XMLHttpRequest()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/XMLHttpRequest/XMLHttpRequest). It is so very much harder for AJAX newcomers to grasp. So I'm going to break it down for you in Part 2!